NOT a forward and backward movement

"Friedman (1975), have shown that these head movements appear to be under visual control and that they are neither initiated by the vestibular system nor synergistic with leg movements".

Head bobbing:
Lock phase while body moves forward
Thrust phase to move head to a new position

Hypothesis:
Balancing the bird during locomotion
Visual/optic stabilization

Experiment:
Pigeons on treadmill
Pigeons' adaptation of walking speed to speed on treadmill

Results:
[Without treadmill]
Lock and thrust phases
Body movement maintaining static velocity
"the head-bobbing movements are not necessarily related to leg and foot movements of the bird"

[Treadmill]
No head-bobbing
Body velocity = treadmill velocity
(Head and body velocity adjustments for discrepancies)

[Very slow treadmill]
No waking
Slow head-bobbing


Landing:
  "However, sensitive to the fact that the apparent and widely accepted 'backward and forward' movements during walking are illusory, the landing of feral pigeons was filmed to confirm this impression".

  "The trajectory of the head proceeds smoothly through space and probably appears to 'bob* because of the forward and backward ' figure of eight' movement of the wingtips".


Discussion:
[Sufficiency of evidence toward optical functionaity]
  "'How can visual stimulation produce compensation to bodily motion unless that motion is apparent, and how can this motion be apparent unless the head moves sufficiently to produce a perceptible change in the position of the head with reference to the visual field?'"

  "The slow slippage of head position evident during extremely slow treadmill speeds could possibly, however, provide sufficient visual error signal to generate these compensatory head movements".


[Tectal optic hypothesis]
  During forward locomotion, everything else moves backwards relative to host, which is desensitized due to its specialized usage during flight (self-indulged backward flow), so the head stabilization prevents this desensitization.

  "A functionalistic interpretation of these 'backward notch' units proposed by Frost & Thomson (1972) suggested that these units might be specialized to respond to object motion by specifically vetoing the self-induced backward flow of motion produced while a bird was in flight (Gibson, 1950, 1966). The rapid differential adaptation to backward motion (Frost & DiFranco, 1976) was consistent with this idea, for when a pigeon is still, these units would recover and thus respond to motion in any direction through their receptive fields".

  "One of several potential problems with this interpretation was that this type of unit might also be maladaptively desensitized to backward motion while the bird was walking".

[Recovering identification of backward motion in optics]
  "The 'hold and thrust' ratcheting of the bird's head through his visual world while walking could possibly be interpreted as a response mechanism which would keep 'backward notch' units in a recovered or semi-recovered state"...

  ..."and thus better able to detect object motion in the backward direction through the visual field".

[Parallax neuron hypothesis]
  "If motion parallax is operating in these species then relative velocity specific neurons would probably be involved".
